On the latest Masters in Business
podcast, I sit down with Brandon Zik. He
is the chief investment officer at Saras
Farmland Funds, a $2 billion firm that
specifically invests in farms. Um, I
know Brandon for for a long time and
I've watched this asset class grow. Uh,
in fact, it's grown to a large enough
entity that by the time you're seeing
this, Wisdom Tree will have closed on
their acquisition. Um, I thought this
was really a fascinating conversation.
You just have no idea how complex and
interesting farmland investing can be.
Uh, I thought this was fascinating and I
think you will also. With no further
ado, my conversation with Saras Farms,
Brandon Zik.
[music] Brandon Zik, welcome to
Bloomberg.
>> Thanks for having me, Barry.
>> Well, you and I know each other for a
long time, and this is long overdue to
have this conversation, and the Wisdom
Tree acquisition was the perfect excuse.
We'll we'll get to that in a moment. I
want to start with your background,
which is kind of fascinating. You grew
up on a dairy and crop farm in
northeastern Pennsylvania.
How did that um farming upbringing shape
your attitudes and thoughts about land,
agriculture, value, and risk? Yeah,
that's a it's a great question because
growing up on a an really active family
farm, you learn a lot of things and one
of them was I definitely did not want to
be a farmer for the rest [laughter] of
my life. Uh we did real work. I was the
oldest of six and so and I had great
parents who, you know, instilled great
values with us, but one of those values
was uh the value of hard work and we
spent a lot of time before and after
school every day actually running this
dairy with our parents. So,
>> so you're you're up at 5 5:30 milking
cows before school?
>> Uh, yeah, before school. Yeah, for us
it'd be about 4:30. And uh with with
three brothers, usually there's three
jobs on a dairy, milking cows, uh
working with equipment, and then
managing manure. And even though I was
the oldest brother, I was really good at
the third. So, that's what I was focused
on.
>> Well, shoveling manure prepped you for
your jobs [laughter] on Wall Street,
right? That's the obvious joke. So, so
let's talk about what led you to Wall
Street. You go to Notre Dame, you get a
BBA in finance and a concentration in
Japanese, which is sort of surprising.
What was that career plan originally
other than not a farmer?
>> Yeah. Uh, when I went to Notre Dame, I I
just wanted to do something different
and I didn't really know what I wanted
to do, but I actually had a a friend in
my dorm that I said, "What are you
majoring in?" And he said, "Well, my dad
works at Maril Lynch. I think finance."
And I said, "Well, that sounds
interesting." And uh so that's how I
started thinking about that. And uh
taking Japanese as a a freshman at Notre
Dame was really more about just doing
something different than the Latin and
French I took at my Jesuit high school
in Scranton, Pennsylvania. And they
talked me into doing a study abroad in
Japan. And I really fell in love with
the country and the culture. And if I
had been looking in, you know, forward
instead of reverse, I probably would
have taken Chinese or something else. I
was looking backwards. and uh you know
continued on with the Japanese and then
was lucky enough throughout my career to
be able to spend some time there not
full-time but at least to travel to
Japan and if we ever get to the point
that uh we have Japanese investors
that'd be really exciting too.
>> So first gig right out of school is you
become you joined the finance analyst
program at Lehman Brothers was that here
or was that close to
>> Oh yeah, that was here in New York.
Yeah, we started training in one world
trade at July of 2001 and we were
eventually in three world financial
center
>> and I spent three years at Lehman
Brothers and learned a lot of different
things but some of it was I don't know
what I want to do and uh I had a friend
that had moved to Morgan Stanley and
that's how I made my way shortly
thereafter over there and spent six
years at Morgan Stanley in various roles
but uh I knew I always wanted to be on
the buy side and uh there, you know,
everyone dreams of being in private
equity and how do you get there and it's
a difficult path and when you think
about what are the things that uh you
could be good at or that you have
interest in that's how I kind of looped
back around to this agriculture piece
because I had a lot of valuation
experience at Morgan Stanley and we
worked on a number of transactions and I
thought well how do I apply this to
agriculture and they're just it's not
like in every other asset class where
there's 30 or 40 places and everyone has
a fund and then you just choose where
you want to go. There's actually very
few people that invest in agriculture
exclusively. And so it was kind of
stacking that background of valuation
and transaction experience and maybe a
rekindled interest in agriculture and
farmland, not on the actual labor side,
but on the investment side. How do you
do this outside of just the big boys
like John Deere or KIH or at the time
Monsanto or these big a companies? How
do you do it? So that's kind of how I
made that path. all the way back around.
>> So, you prefer spreadsheets to
pitchforks and shovels
>> a little bit. Yeah. Although, there are
plenty of days uh in my career now that
you get tired of being in the office and
you say, "I'd rather I'd much rather
drive around and look at some of our
properties and check in on some of our
farm tenants."
>> Well, we're going to talk about the
farms and the tenants and what that that
investment process is like, but I just
want to stay with Morgan Stanley for
another moment. You're there for six
years. You start out really as a grunt
in strategic planning, due diligence,
valuation analysis, deal negotiation,
execution, but eventually you become a
VP in the investment management
division. Is that where you really hone
your chops on acquisitions and strategy?
>> Yeah, it was an interesting time to be
there within investment management.
Morgan Stanley had a mandate to really
grow that business, especially on the
alternative side. So the plan had been
to put together a pretty sizable balance
sheet by minority stakes and asset
managers, maybe take some asset managers
like Frontp Point over completely. And
then the great financial crisis happened
and we went from a team that was really
given the opportunity to to use a
balance sheet to we were told we need to
create a balance sheet. So things that
we had bought now needed to be sold. And
that was really the impetus for the
transaction that sold Vancampen and a
handful of other Morgan Stanley equity
businesses to Invesco. So on that deal,
I was actually working more on the sell
side of that deal. And when you're
selling things, you realize this
probably isn't a long-term uh career
strategy. Eventually, you run out of
things to sell,
>> right? Once [laughter] the sheep fallen
sheep runs down. Um so you started at
Lehman, but you got out of there before
the financial crisis. You lived through
the financial crisis at Morgan Stanley.
Um the CEO at the time was John Mack. Is
that right?
>> Oh, when I started it was Phil Purcell.
John Mack came shortly thereafter and
then or came back shortly thereafter and
then uh during my time there within
investment management, James Gorman came
over from Merill to take over. I had
Mack on the program a couple of years
ago uh after he wrote his autobiography.
And really of all the major brokerage
firms, there were a handful of companies
that came through the financial crisis
balance sheet and reputation intact. Um,
Max seems to be the guy that guided
Morgan Stanley through, cut that very
reasonable deal with Mitsubishi for some
muchneeded capital and, uh, came out the
other side and Morgan Stanley is now
absolutely one of the biggest brokerage
shops, full service brokerage shops uh,
on the street. Yeah, I mean they've, you
know, not without peril for everyone at
that time, but certainly, you know, they
were able to na navigate through in a
way that very few were able to do it as
successfully as Morgan Stanley was.
>> And at Morgan Stanley, is that where you
got your chartered alternative
investment analyst credit?
>> Yep. I did that. uh I didn't have the
time to do the CFA also at the and
during that time but yeah it was
something that was slightly different
and uh you know I always had interest in
commodities and other types of
alternatives not just hedge funds or
private equities so there was it was
just a way to learn a little more and uh
add it to the resume h
>> how much did the financial crisis
precipitate you're saying hey I have
skills and I have insights I'm going
back to farmland but from a different
perspective
>> yeah well it definitely started the
conversation and being here in New York
I knew there were very few options for
probably investing in agriculture at
least at that time even today we don't
recommend it but there are people in the
big city in on the coast that invest in
farmland and I had a very close friend
from Notre Dame that at the time was
running private equity at Notre Dame's
endowment and I had contacted him and
said I'm interviewing with a few of
these firms that invest in farmland so
groups like John Hancock and UBS that
had existing funds or separate account
businesses
that would invest in US or global
farmland. And I asked him, "Have you
guys underwritten them? Have you
invested with them? Have you talked to
them?" And he was very frank and he
said, "Uh, generally we don't think you
get paid for the the risk involved with
investing in land and the duration that
you need to hold it." But he said, "Let
me introduce you to there's another
Notre Dame guy that he started something
really small. Uh, he's got very few
assets, but he's investing in farmland."
And that's how I met our founder, Perry
Ve through my friend Tim Dozel, who's
now the CIO of Notre Dame's Endowment,
actually runs the whole shop. And so
he's had a very successful career. And
one of the best decisions, at least from
my standpoint, that he made was putting
Perry and I in touch.
>> It's it's amazing how these random
introductions through various um
networking groups and alumni groups
really can lead to some interesting
outcomes. Um, when you joined Saras in
2010,
$30 million. I mean, that's a that's a
small single brokerage account, what
what were you thinking joining a firm
that tiny?
>> You know, that sounds a lot like what my
wife was asking me at [laughter] the
time, too. Why are we doing this and
what are we doing? And, uh, it was
interesting. There were Perry had 30
million in assets. I think it was 17
million in equity and we didn't charge
on the debt. So, he said, I can afford
to pay you something. It won't be much,
but it'll be something. And I I talked
to my wife Aaron and said, "I think this
would be a great opportunity." And she
kind of echoed some of the things that
people I worked with at Morgan Stanley
when they said, "Well, what do you do if
this Yeah, what do you do if this
fails?" And of course, no one knew
anything about what we were going to do,
but they said, "Well, what if it fails?"
And I said, "Well, if it fails,
>> there's two things that give me
confidence. One is I'll know it. There's
only, you know, it's a very small shop.
It's not like some trader in Singapore
is going to blow us up overnight. I'll
know it's not working. Either the
investments are bad or we're not raising
money. And the second was there's going
to be a great skill set developed here
that even if it doesn't work, the worst
thing I can do is just move back to New
York. And now I've got a differentiated
thing on my resume. So, you know, we
started there. Uh we moved in December
of 2010 to Southbend, Indiana. It's not
a great weather trade really. Even in
New York, December is not great, but
Southbend it's much worse.
>> That's like zero and a lot of snow. It's
cold. Yeah, there was a lot of snow as
the moving truck was moving in, but it
but it's been great. And we started to
really build that that momentum and uh
you know, just being in uh on the ground
floor of a company with a founder who
has a vision is you know, you can't ask
for anything more.
>> So, farmland is a real asset. It's
different from traditional real estate
assets. you think of offices, multif
family, um warehouse, there's so many
different uh single family homes. What
is it about farmland that makes it such
a unique investment opportunity?
>> Yeah, I mean there's a few things that
go into it that just make this market
different. And you don't I don't
personally think you have to have grown
up on a farm to know anything about
farmland or agriculture. But it is a
very um you know it's a very people
person business because these are the
types of properties that we believe you
have to rent directly. We don't use just
property managers to go out and do it.
But in farmland there hasn't really been
an institutional rollup. So in office
and in manufacturing and distribution
centers and cold storage everything's
been rolled up over time into big
institutions and probably the most
similar to farmland when you think of
what is the underlying asset would be
timber and back 40 years ago Jeremy
Grantham and others started a huge um
kind of move of taking the end users of
timber and handing their uh their assets
that they're going to use uh as part of
the end product to investors. But in
farmland, the end users don't own the
land. So the groups like John Deere and
Monsanto and Mosaic and ADM, they might
either sell into agriculture or buy
products out of it. But the land, while
it is the true means of production, it's
usually owned by others, not these big
corporations. So particularly in the
Midwest, you'd say that active family
farmers, like that farm I grew up on,
own about 40% of the real estate.
Institutional investors today own about
3%. And that includes the largest
investors like the Mormon Church, the
Bill and Meinda Gates Foundation, groups
like Cirrus that might own between a
couple hundred million to three or four
billion in assets, but you just don't
have these um big other groups that own
land. It's a very disperse ownership
group of made up of estates, trusts,
non-farming heirs that have owned this
for generations. And two or three
generations previously, they were
actively farming the ground. They went
to college and did other things, but
there's zero pretty much zero vacancy in
US farmland.
>> Zero vacancy. That's amazing.
>> Yeah. Every every farm that can be
farmed is farmed every year. And you
lose farmland every year in the US
because of things like development and
conservation. And in parts of
California, maybe lack of water, aridity
that they take farms out of production
to transfer water to other properties.
So you have this group of or this total
pile of farmland in the US that gets
smaller every year. You have farmers
that understand this is a scale game.
They want to grow. So it's an
interesting dynamic for investors to
come into the space because it's not as
if you decided tomorrow Barry that you
wanted to farm 100,000 acres, you could
buy all the equipment, the seed, the
fertilizer, the chemicals, and you could
find the labor to do all of that. But
what you wouldn't find is 100,000
available acres to go to go farm.
>> It's that that small amount of acreage
comes up each year.
>> Yeah. It's very well it's just not up
there's not a jump ball every year for
it. It's all occupied and even uh most
farmers and I'll use the Midwest as an
example because growing up in the
Northeast farmland was much different.
There wasn't quite as robust a rental
market. in the Midwest, which is one of
the reasons we've focused on that is
there's a very robust rental market and
we want to rent land. So, we want not
just one or two large farmers who will
get provide us with a rent indication or
a rent bid. We want the opportunity to
have 10 or 20 different farmers and and
these are all we work with across the
board 170 different farm tenants today.
And you know, all of those farm tenants
rent our land, they own land, and they
rent a lot of land from other people. So
that actually becomes kind of a
long-term proprietary deal sourcing
network for new acquisitions. So we feel
like we are doing the institutional roll
up. If you decide if we decided we're
only going to do deals of 25 or 50
million in size, there's not a lot of
deals to do every year and certainly not
in the Midwest. mostly smaller uh family
farms, [clears throat] regional farms
that occasionally come up when the next
generation decides we don't want to farm
this the way mom and dad and grandpa
did. We're we're going to the big city,
>> right? And even a lot of what they've
already made that decision in some cases
a generation ago, but they still own the
land. It's been more of not a financial
asset, but more like a family asset. And
what you tend to see and and taxes drive
a lot of behavior in every industry. In
agriculture, it's pretty meaningful
because if you have this one very large
real estate asset, people usually wait
to get that step up in basis and then
they're saying, "Well, now is the time
we're going to sell regardless of market
conditions. It's we don't want to pay
the tax going back three, four, five
generations to a cost basis of nothing."
Right? So there are kind of unique time
periods and maybe 2012, end of 2012 was
an example where there were some new tax
uh things coming up, a higher cap
long-term capital gains tax, the
Obamacare investment tax, and there was
at least a discussion around that estate
tax exemption being reduced from I think
at the time it was at four and a half or
5.5 million per spouse down to a
million. So that drove some real
behavior at the end of 2012 from people
saying we want to sell this before the
taxes go up. Usually folks just wait
until they get that step up in basis and
then they're going to sell it.
>> And today um a family or what is it 15
12 used used to be 12 million exemption
for estates. I think it's up to close to
15 per
>> Yeah. per spouse per significantly
larger. So any discussion around a
reduction in that which obviously things
get permanent and I'll use air quotes
around permanent because these days
everything changes but yeah that when
you have this one significantly large
asset that the tax taxation on that will
dictate how they move it sometimes.
>> Really fascinating. So so let's talk a
little bit. We we we were discussing
earlier how farmland generates revenue.
Uh, and we're going to go into great
detail with that, but I I want to
explain to investors
what farmland gives them exposure to.
What What are you getting when you buy a
chunk or a bunch of different farms?
>> Yeah. So, farmland and I'll I'll focus
more on um Midwest row crops, but row
crops generally are annual crops because
there are a few different buckets. And
when you say row crops, I think corn,
wheat, barley.
>> Yeah. Vegetables, annual crops, crops
that are planted every year. You rotate
as opposed to permanent crops. And and
really it's a a complete distinction.
Permanent crops would be things like
wine grapes, uh pecans, almonds,
pistachios, uh blueberries, things like
that where your exposure is not just to
dirt, which is what rowcrops really is.
like our asset is dirt and there's
optionality around what you can plant
there. Your exposure in permanent crops
is more specific to a specific crop and
in some in some cases also a very
specific variety. So if you had red
delicious apples and they're out of
favor and people want honey crisp apples
then while you own apples you don't own
the prime asset. And so we've focused
almost exclusively on row crops and with
row and we've done that for a few
reasons. one is we think it's much less
risk, but it also hits on the the
investment objectives of farmland we
think more cleanly. So some of that is
current income, uh a positive
correlation with inflation,
diversification in a portfolio,
non-correlation, and then also an
appreciating capital asset. So our asset
is primarily dirt. So there's there's a
little bit of pre appre depreciation you
can take around things like if there's
buildings or grain storage bins or
irrigation equipment, but primarily our
asset is just dirt and it's appreciating
over time. And the reason for that is a
few things. Uh the Chicago Fed has data
going back almost 70 years that'll say
that farmland has averaged about 6%
price appreciation during those 70 years
on an annualized basis. Is that real net
of inflation or before inflation?
>> That's total that's gross. So if you
look at uh what compos what makes up
that it's really just inflation plus
gains in productivity. So every time
there's new technology whether it's seed
genetics or fertilizer technology or um
equipment technology, anything that can
create more yield on a farm. In theory,
that re that return should fall to the
land owner or at least a portion of it
should fall to the land owner, not just
to the operator. So, if you're an active
manager, we feel like you'll capture
some of that. If you're a passive owner
of land that doesn't understand, well,
what is the what is the land actually
producing? What should I be generating
in rent? How do I capitalize that into a
land value? Maybe you don't. But if you
look back over time, that capital
appreciation's been about 6%. And it's
really just those maybe there's been a
little bit of cap rate compression, but
it's more around gains and productivity
and then just CPI inflation.
>> Let's talk about inflation. I was
reading last week that beef prices are
at record highs. For many types of
investors, especially fixed income,
inflation is really a big challenge to
navigate around. It sounds like with
farmland, inflation, isn't necessarily a
bad thing. H how do you think about
rising prices, especially in the
supermarket, and what that means to the
properties you own?
>> Yeah. So, within agriculture, inflation
comes two ways. So, if you're an
operator, if you're a farmer,
inflation's real because you're
>> you're paying more for seed, fertilizer,
chemicals,
>> equipment, wages, wages, everything that
gets baked into growing that crop.
inflation plays a part in it. As the
land owner, the actual dirt has a very
positive correlation with inflation over
time. So, we I'm not going to say we
love inflationary environments, but this
is an investment that's built for
inflationary environments. And the way
that we think about how global central
banks treat, you know, the way they do
business, we think we're in an
inflationary environment for the the
long term. So, we think this is an asset
that works well with that.
>> This is a good hedge against rising
prices.
>> That's right. And we've, you know, back
when rates were extremely low, a lot of
our investors used farmland or used
Cirrus as a inflation sub or a fixed
income substitute, something that's
positively correlated with inflation
even with rates being higher. I view
farmland more as a tips like thing and
we haven't seen much appreciation there.
>> What is the yield on farmland as an
investor and where does that yield come
from? Is it rent? Is it sale of
property? Is it other elements?
>> Yeah. So the the gross rental yield on
our portfolios range between four and 5%
a year. Now, when you think about if you
look at the index, so there's
non-investable indices that are out
there or if you look at the the Chicago
Fed or some of the large land grant
universities, they'll put out a lot of
data around what cap rate do farms trade
at because while there's no uh Indiana
farmland go on Bloomberg yet, [laughter]
uh there there are a lot of public
transactions that happen and we'll
attend two to 300 public auctions a year
and they'll be in attorney's offices
VFWs. These are on a random Tuesday
night at 6:00, someone's selling 120
acres of farmland. And we track where
does this sell versus our reserve price.
We know what rent we could earn on that
property. So what implied cap rate is
land selling at. Generally speaking, in
the Midwest in the Chicago Fed 7th
district, land trades at one and a half
to two and a half%. And your buyer is
typically a neighboring farmer. So
that's their strategic investment
they're making. And that farmer may take
the landowner rental return and their
operating return and compress them
together to justify whatever price
they're paying. But we try to target
that four and a half to 5 a.5% when we
purchase a farm. And that'll come it'll
all come exclusively in terms of rent.
That's what we're underwriting. But then
the total return will be that mix of
rental income and then appreciation over
time. And appreciation can be that beta
that I referred to that, you know,
Chicago Fed data that says 6% a year on
average. But then there's alpha that we
can add. And a lot of that is because
the people that are selling farms are
usually not active farmers. I mentioned
these are estates, trusts, non-farming
heirs, and there's some lowhanging fruit
in terms of capex that a farmland
investor can do to decrease the risk of
a crop growing and also increase the
yield. So a really you know one a common
thing that we do is add irrigation
>> and that irrigation will help us
increase the yield decrease the risk for
the tenant and it increases our rent but
also we can capitalize that increased
rent into a higher land value over time.
So if we can find those opportunities to
do the capex that's our bread and
butter.
>> I'm going to say something that sounds a
little ridiculous but you're a Graham
Dodd valuation investor into farmland.
Is is that am I getting this right?
>> Yeah. I mean, there's no black box here
to what we're doing. It's really a
blocking and tackling strategy. And we
encourage all of our investors when they
when they're contemplating this or even
on an annual or by annual basis come out
and look at these properties and see
what we're doing. And and we have folks
that have, you know, trade they've been
trading their entire career and they'll
come to a farm auction and say, "Well,
you were underwriting the same rent on
two properties across the street from
each other. one sold for X, one sold for
2X. How does that happen? And it's just
who wanted which one and how in some in
some cases or instances the way in which
the farm is being sold is inefficient.
Uh the rental market's completely
inefficient. So there are times that
we've bought properties in some cases
from other institutional investors and
we've doubled the rent on day one, not
because we wanted to charge an
uneconomic rent, but because the farmer
was willing to pay that rent for that
land. and and the the active management
that the previous owner was using was
either not very good or not that active.
So that's where we think we we do a
really good job of just identifying
where can we add alpha and then again
it's not a black box. This is really
just ticking and tying and blocking and
tapping.
>> So let's let's talk about that alpha.
Um, you talked about rental income and
appreciation and sale of land, but I
recall a conversation we had years ago
up in Maine where you described all
these additional ways that professional
farmland management generates improved
economics and some of the notes I took,
mineral rights, solar and wind farm,
easements,
uh, additional land use. How do you take
farmland that for centuries has just
been producing crops and find ways to
improve the economics?
>> Yeah. And you know, investing in the US
is a key part of this because the land
owner has a lot of rights that in other
parts of the world you just don't have.
So mineral rights here in the US, the
the surface owner generally owns them
>> all the way down. Right.
>> Yeah. And and in some cases, those
rights have been severed 100 years ago.
And in certain parts of the Midwest and
out west, you don't own mineral rights.
We like to own them. Uh it's it's kind
of funny. The family farm I grew up on
in northeastern Pennsylvania growing up,
no one knew what Marcela Shale was, but
everyone in Suscoana County has made
more money pumping gas than they ever
did milking cows. And it was really
seeing that in the early 2000s that as
we buy land, you think, well, how do you
maximize the value? These are these are
real assets. They have to be actively
managed. something as simple as
harvesting timber, uh, that that's
really lowhanging fruit, doing select
cuts, renting farms out for recreation
or hunting, frankly, if you don't rent
it out, someone will hunt that property
anyway without insurance and without
paying you anything. So, you might as
well get insurance and get paid for it.
So Perry had Perry Ve our founder he had
been doing that long before in parts of
Indiana and Illinois generating mineral
rights but the way that he structured
our vehicle was really beneficial to
some of these long-term value options
because I think when he was starting
Cirrus in 2007 most of the people that
he worked with at the time and and
friends of his in private equity said
just set up a typical draw down fund and
get it invested and as opposed to
perpetual
>> yeah at the end of eight or 10 years
just sell them all off. He decided that
an evergreen fund really fit the asset
class better because most of the farm
tenants we're working with, they want to
farm this property for 10, 20, 30 years.
And that's kind of the way they're
thinking in terms of how they grow their
business. And being able to own the
property for that long makes a lot of
sense. If you have lees that want to
rent that way and if you think of who
are the ultimate over time, who are
going to be the ultimate investors in
this asset class, it's going to be folks
that have very longdated either goals or
liabilities. So endowments, foundations,
trusts, infrastructure funds, insurance
companies. So having this longdated
asset where you're not forced to churn
or forced
>> to have these transaction cost is really
important. And what we what we found
later on too was some of the optionality
around farms. So wind has been around
for a long time and that's kind of a
mildly incremental increase in revenue
on land.
>> You could put a wind farm up on a farm
but still uh
>> you continue to farm it. Yeah. on a 700
acre farm. We have one in western
Indiana has seven wind turbines. They
might take up 20 acres total between the
turbine and the roads. The rest of it we
continue to rent. So that rent from
those wind turbines, it's incremental.
It might increase 20 or 30 basis points
over your farm rent. So we'll take it,
but but it's not going to change your
life. when we started doing things like
solar. So solar you'll instead of seeing
20 or 30 basis points, you're seeing on
an option period maybe a three to 5x the
income return. So if you think back to
we're buying land at a 4 and a half to
5.5% income
>> over the course of 5 years during an
option period if it were to go to solar
now we're generating 15 to 20 25%
annualized income. Wow. So we like that.
But in that case, it's taking the whole
footprint of the land. And if when we
buy a farm, we're just underwriting it
as an agricultural property. Farm rents,
capex, what type of return do we think
we can earn over time? And we're
targeting kind of that 8 to 10% net
through a cycle on farmland. But then
once we own the property and as you
aggregate properties over time, maybe we
started with a couple hundred acres 10
or 12 years ago, but now in a township,
we now own 2,000 acres. And it's just
been all of these incremental bolt-on
acquisitions. Now, that has probably
more interest from some of the
developers on the solar side or for
other things, too. That can be even much
higher revenue or value. But we always
fall back on if it's just a farm, that's
what we underwrote and we're happy with
that. And we'll continue to aggregate
those properties over time. We have over
500 today. There are years where we'll
do 30 or 40 closings or transactions to
invest 80 or 100 million. Most
institutional investors would never do
that, but we've we've really decided
that that's where you can add a lot of
alpha on the acquisition side by doing
these bolt-ons at a discount to what
that like you said, it's a very uh
financeworthy strategy. It's just being
applied to an asset class that you
usually don't see it.
>> You mentioned leases. When I think of a
lease, I think of either an apartment
lease for a year or two or my office
lease here in New York for 10 years. How
long does a the average um farmer lease
their land for or lease your land for if
they want to farm a crop?
>> Yeah. So, we try to target three to five
year leases. And I'd say three is the
overwhelming majority. Given that our
farms are mostly growing row crops, you
can see three years on the board of
trade, you have transparency to where
are prices. So farmers if they want to
hedge, if they want to um think about
selling a part of their crop into the
future, they can do that. And and we can
all agree, okay, over the next three
years, this is what that rental income
will be. Uh but when you think about
other like across a farmer's portfolio,
I mentioned they own land and they
intend to own that uh forever. you know,
that's how they think about it. And they
rent our land, and those are usually
three-year leases, but then they rent a
lot of land from other people. Those
other people, even if a farmer's been
operating that land for 30 years, it's
usually 31-year leases. So, making
decision because the land owner, I'm not
going to say they're not sophisticated,
but they're unwilling to do a multi-year
lease because they want to have the
optionality to sell the property free
and clear of a lease if they decide they
want to sell it. So, usually when
farmers look to us, they're saying,
"Well, we want to add uh a new combine
or a tractor or make these overhead or
hiring or infrastructure decisions."
They actually view a three-year lease as
a long-term lease in in the farmland
space. We have some leases that'll go
eight or 10 years if they're growing uh
more specialty crops. So we have about
20% of our portfolio that generates
higher revenue because they're growing
things like potatoes for potato chips,
processing tomatoes. The the kind of
highest quality mint you can grow in the
world is in the Midwest. So we grow that
on our properties and that requires a
more diverse rotation and a longer
planning for the farmers. So we'll allow
a longer lease in those instances and we
allow that because they're paying us a
stronger rent.
>> Huh. Really, really kind of fascinating.
I want to talk about scale. You
mentioned bolt-ons and a lot of things.
I'm kind of fascinated by the scale and
the question I wanted to ask is
are each farm that comes up for sale, do
they have the same or different value
for different acquirers? Like I'm going
to assume if you're the adjacent farm,
that next farm might be more valuable.
You spend a lot of money on combines and
tractors. Hey, if you can use it on 500
acres instead of 300, your your cost per
acre should go down.
>> Of course,
>> what what's the impact on scaling up?
And what's a big farm? Is a 100 acres
big? Is a thousand acres big?
>> Yeah. I mean, it's all relative, but in
to your point about uh are there
different values for different buyers?
Absolutely. Even if you even if two
buyers both intend to farm it, there are
uh absolutely differences in how someone
will value it. In some cases on the same
land, it comes down to what crop do you
intend to grow.
>> So, I had talked briefly about specialty
crops, but if you're if if there's a
farm in northern Indiana with irrigation
that comes up, if the the tenant we're
looking at wants to grow corn and
soybeans, they're going to be able to
pay us one rent. if the tenant we're
talking to would grow um popcorn and
processing tomatoes or potatoes, they
can pay us almost double this rent on
the same land. So, when we look at
farmers, we're trying to identify which
farmer can generate the highest revenue,
has a strong balance sheet, uh operates
with the least amount of risk so that
our rent will be paid every year in the
spring. But there's um you know, it's
really important when you look at land
to determine what's the highest and best
use even just on the agriculture side.
So when you think of every farmer would
love to have thousand acre blocks of
land in the Midwest. That's hard because
the history of ownership was the
Homestead Act. So it's 40 acre blocks.
So within our portfolio, we have 40 acre
farms and we don't love doing those
transactions, but if we can bolt them on
to an existing property with an existing
lease and the same farmer, that's kind
of a no-brainer. But our largest farms
in southwestern Georgia, it's 7,000
contiguous acres. So that's about 10
square miles in one piece. It's all
irrigated and the history of ownership
there is plantations. Out west the
history of ownership was ranches. So
these larger tracks of land. You tend to
see more institutional investment in
those areas along with permanent crops.
And there's a lot of reasons people will
tell you it's around scale and
efficiency. In some cases, I think it's
just you can write a bigger check. If I
need to deploy 50 million at once, I can
do it better in those areas because the
farms are just bigger. or it's a
permanent crop that it's a hundred or
$200,000 an acre so I can deploy capital
more quickly. For us, it's harder to
gain that scale. But it really starts
with that tenant network. So those 170
farmers we work with today, they farm
our 170,000 acres or 180,000 acres. They
own collectively about 250,000 acres
that I don't expect they will sell, but
that's kind of what they own. But they
rent over 750,000 acres from other
people. And those other people are those
estates, trusts, non-farming heirs. And
when those folks want to sell, usually
they don't have a public auction.
Usually it's a private transaction. The
first person they call is their farm
tenant. And while we would, if our fund
was closed, we would love to see prices
just continue to escalate up forever.
You know, over time,
>> you're a buyer also. You're on both
sides.
>> Yeah. We like cycles. So when farmers
have really strong balance sheets like
in 2021 and 2022, they were probably not
passing on as many of those purchase
options to us, but now we've we're in
our third year of lower commodity
prices. Uh farmers have to be careful
about how much working capital they're
going to liquidate to go uh buy a
long-term asset. And if it's a very
strategic farm to them, they're going to
try to buy it very close to home. But if
it's something they're willing to travel
for and they they're currently farming
and as much as they'd like to grow their
acres to that point about efficiency you
mentioned they don't want to lose acres.
So if a farmer farms 5,000 acres if one
of their landlords who owns 500 sells
and they don't they're either not able
to buy it or or someone that we're
partnering uh with them on if they're
not able to buy it then they just lose
those acres and they immediately become
over capitalized. every other acre
becomes more expensive to farm per acre
to farm.
>> And so they think about it in terms of
uh protecting acres and growth when you
say, "Well, why would they partner with
someone like us?" So when we look at
farms that would make sense to add to
the portfolio, in some cases, we'd pay a
little more because it's a strategic
farm that's close by. But we say no,
>> probably 29 times out of 30 when we're
at a public auction. The hit rate is
low.
>> And while we'd like that to be higher,
that's the investment discipline. We
we'll lose sometimes by 40 or 50% above
our reserve price.
>> Back to Graham dot. Abs. [laughter]
Absolutely. You mentioned ranch
ranching. We've been mostly talking
about farming. When I think of ranches,
I think of cattle farms, horse farms,
sheep. What do these ranchers do? How
much of the assets you own are ranches
versus farms? Or is there a mix? Some do
a little bit of both.
>> Uh some can do both. Uh not our farm. So
our portfolio is exclusively uh farming
not ranching acres. Uh you tend to see
those ranching acres you know if you
think of what's the highest and best use
if you could grow amongst row crops even
corn is the highest revenue then
soybeans then wheat I mean cotton would
be up there as well but as you uh look
kind of down the value cycle ranching
would be very low because you're you're
just not generating much rent. So, it's
more marginal land that's used for that
or larger tracks of land. Typically,
like one of the big farmland owners is
the Mormon church. They're also one of
the five largest cattle feeders in the
country. So, they own a lot of ranch
land where they're actually grazing
>> and then sending it to their own cattle.
>> Yeah. And they'll graze the cattle and
then eventually, you know, take that all
the way to market. That's the type of
vertical integration you'll see in some
areas. In row crops, you just don't see
that. We like to identify tenants we're
working with that if they have a dairy,
so they need the land to feed the cows,
they need the land for their nutrient
management program, those tenants are
willing to pay more for farms if it's a
strategic farm that's close by because
they can't travel all over the place.
But a lot of our tenants, they might
have a home base that kind of looks like
the center of this table. And the radius
that they'll travel being willing to
farm, you know, they'll rent in these
other areas if they can find enough
acres to have scale because ultimately
every time a son or daughter wants to
come back to the farm uh to help
increase that family business, you can't
just slice the pie more ways. You have
to grow the pie. And I mentioned earlier
the amount of total acres in the US is
going down every year. And in the
Midwest, you don't have problems of
aridity or erosion, but you have a lot
of development pressure coming in. The
cities are expanding, manufacturing's
expanding. So there are acres that
farmers lose for for those reasons every
year.
>> So it seems absurd to talk about
farmland and artificial intelligence.
But there are two different ways I want
to go with this. The first is these
giant data centers. Uh they pay a lot
more. they are a higher spending buyer
or renter than say someone growing row
crops. What's the relationship between
farmland and AI and big infrastructure
investing?
>> Yeah, I mean we're seeing it firsthand
now in the Midwest. The amount of uh
additional building that's happening
around data centers is unbelievable. and
the the amount of capital that's being
invested in in these areas like Ohio,
Indiana, Michigan, Illinois around data
center development, it's really
staggering when you think about it. So,
there's uh just outside of Southbend,
Indiana, two very large data center
projects that I think each is investing
between 9 and 11 billion on these data
centers. And the real estate price, even
if it's I think our average cost per
acre across our portfolio is about
$8,000. You see data center prices
anywhere from a hundred to $300,000.
12x that's crazy
>> at least if not more.
>> And who are these who are the companies
that are these big buyers? All the big
names we know.
>> Yeah, it's the big ones that are out
there. I think you see
>> Google, Microsoft, who else is uh
>> Yeah, groups like Amazon, Meta. It's it
seems like what you're finding now is uh
a lot less hoteling space for data
centers and they're all single user and
it seems like they're going after the
best locations which would be large
tracks of land close to infrastructure.
So you want natural gas. You need
three-phase power with capacity on the
line. You need fiber lines or rail
access to run fiber and you need water.
And there while there are multiple ways
for cooling water whether it's closed
loop or open loop is a big part of all
of it. So it you what you tend to find
are a lot of these old rust belt areas
but but um kind of virgin farmland is
the best candidate for it and uh you
have these single users that are going
after that land. So in our portfolio
we've aggregated large properties over
time and there seems to be a lot of
interest around that because it's just
there very few of these places where you
can do it. It's not like a even a
distribution center that next to every
exit on the highway you could justify
putting one there. You need all the
energy and water infrastructure and
fiber infrastructure and you need
capacity. So every new and there aren't
a lot of new natural gas fired power
plants that get built, but when one gets
built, it seems like a logical um kind
of co-user of that power would be one of
the
>> I was going to say what about
colllocation where you just run a NAT
gas line and build your own electrical
facility adjacent to one of these power
plants.
>> I feel like some of that is definitely
happening and will continue. I mean
ultimately some of these data centers
will all be powered by modular nukes
when when you get down to it. You need
>> thorium. Is that what we're talking
about? potentially. Yeah. I mean, the
idea of uh when a data center is going
in or even a big manufacturing facility,
sometimes you'll see colllocation of
solar and while solar has a lot of
benefits, it's not going to power
something like that. That's more just I
think for credits to sell into the grid.
>> Uh I mean, we have three Mile Island
potentially coming back on. So, there's
a lot of different options. And I think
across states like New York State,
they've closed down some nuclear
facilities or consolidated. I
>> Well, Sham never opened here. where they
spent billions over 20 years. There was
no uh escape route. Bad islands are not
great places for nuclear facilities. But
you know, you see countries like France,
90 plus% of their power generation comes
from nuclear,
>> right? And the hard thing when you think
about power, I mean, I I kind of laugh.
I had uh two siblings that both went to
Cornell, so I've been to Ithaca quite a
bit. We own farms in upstate New York.
And every time I drive from our farms
there down to our family farm in
northeastern Pennsylvania, you'll drive
through parts of New York State that
will say no industrial, you'll see signs
that say no industrial solar, no wind
farms, no fracking, no nuclear, but they
all turn on their lights. So, we have
this uh really uh perverse uh view out
there that and you could call it nimism,
you can call it whatever you want, but
we need more of everything. If you power
Yeah. If you look at a there's a few
great graphs out there that show kind of
the history of um consumption for power
and the same amount of coal that's been
used throughout history this year will
be the year that the most coal is used.
The most Pete that's ever been burned or
wood is happening this year. The most
oil produced or burned natural gas. The
only energy source that's ever gone down
really is nuclear and that was out of um
out of regulation island. Yeah. There's
a lot of fears around it. And so if you
look at what do we need, there's no
energy, in my opinion, there's no energy
transition that will ever happen. This
is we need more of everything. So
>> that's really fascinating. I I saw a
chart, I forgot where, biggest producer
of solar energy in the United States,
Walmart, all their distribution centers,
all their superstores, especially in the
south, they just say, "We have dead
space on the roof loaded up with solar."
And they're not only subsidizing their
own power consumption, they're getting
credits for selling it back to the grid.
>> Yeah, I think it makes a ton of sense,
especially if you're building green
field when you can actually, it's tough
to retrofit things for solar. And even
when we look at farmland that goes to
solar, uh the idea of these little
community solar gardens, I don't think
is very scalable. you tend to see more
industrialsized solar fields and it's,
you know, from the the landowner
standpoint or the farmer's standpoint or
the if the if a farmer is the owner, you
know, they're interested in the highest
and best use. So, what you tend to see
is we have farm tenants that they sell
land for development all the time. They,
you know, these farmers are very
sophisticated. They're CEOs. Uh this has
been happening for generations where
someone will sell land that's close to
town for a very high price and then
they'll move 20 miles farther out and
buy three times the amount of land and
set up shop there. So while the idea of
uh a farmer moving always seems, you
know, really hard to believe. This has
been happening forever. The western
suburbs of Chicago have extended and
extended and extended. And farmers are,
you know, I consider them dumb as a fox.
Like they'll [laughter] they'll sell for
you say that as a farmer.
>> Yeah, I know. It's it's interesting.
They they'll sell for a very high price
and when that development doesn't
happen, they'll buy it back for less and
they'll wait for the next round of
development and sell it again. So
>> Oh, that's funny.
>> So, you know, some of the competition we
see when we're buying farms, it's not
just farmers that had profitable years.
It's farmers that have 1031 exchange
money because they sold land to a data
center or they
>> they have three years to reinvest before
they get hit with taxes, something.
Yeah, it's about 18 months and they have
to identify properties, but they have to
go out there and reinvest it in kind of
like like to keep their cost basis and
farmers are really good at um you know
figuring their way around these tax
codes and you know good for them and I
think that's a lot of the competition we
see are 1031 buyers because there's just
big dollars getting thrown around
>> that have no choice they have to get
deployed otherwise
>> and they want to continue to buy
farmland and a lot of farmers I mean
it's really interesting when you talk to
them and you'd say, "Well, what's your
dream scenario?" And one of our tenants
who sold some land to a solar company
and they were selling land for a data
center. I said, "Well, what's your
goal?" And they said, "Well, we want to
continue to farm. We just want to do it
debtree." So, it's not like they just
want to buy a place in Florida. They'll
have one, but they they want to continue
to farm. So, they want to go buy more
farmland.
>> Really really interesting. We haven't
really talked about the risk of farming.
Um, and a couple of my favorite YouTube
shows. So, I'm a car guy. I like Harry's
Garage and his adjacent channel is
Harry's Farm. And watching him do this
stuff, you realize what a difficult job
farming is, especially sometimes there's
drought, sometimes there's too much
rain. It's so expensive and and so much
of your product is totally out of your
control. And then if you liked Top Gear,
there's an Amazon show called Clarkson's
Farm and and it makes you realize, god,
this is an impossible business at least
in the UK. Farmers there are having a
really hard time. So let's talk a little
bit about the risks of farming and the
risk of investing in farming. What are
the possible downsides?
>> Yeah. So on that being a farmer is a
very difficult business. I mean, there
are so many different risk factors and
so many decision points that you can
make that completely can impact your
bottom line in a material way. Not just
what crop you grow and when you plant,
but when you sell it, how you sell it,
who you sell it to, how you store your
grain, and all these things can change
yeartoear. And to your point, and this
kind of goes back to there hasn't been a
lot of institutional roll up yet on the
land side, but the people that sell
inputs to farmers and the inputs can be
seed, fertilizer, equipment, whatever it
may be. And the buyers of their crop,
the large grain buyers out there, your
bunggees and ADMs and cargills, they all
have a lot of pricing power. Your
average farmer doesn't have any pricing
power. So they're a price taker on the
input side, they're a price taker on the
crop side. So part of our value ad for
investors is we try to identify farmers
that are the most well positioned to
have whatever pricing power they can
get. So they have to have scale so that
when they're buying inputs that they can
go out and you know negotiate the best
price possible. You want farmers that
can store their grain so they're not
selling it all at harvest. They want to
be able to sell it into the spring when
other people don't have the crop. Yeah.
So hopefully you get that positive
carry. So we try to identify those
folks. But when you're when you're
looking at investing in farmland, what
are the downsides? Well, there's certain
just climate issues. So, if you're close
to a river and it floods, that's a
problem. If you have very sandy soils
and it doesn't rain
>> and you have drought, that's a problem.
So, we like to have farms where we can
do some of that capex like adding
irrigation or adding drainage so that
you can help manage some of those risks.
>> How do you manage around weeds, pests,
bugs, and disease? because there are a
lot of dangerous diseases that literally
come in on the wind.
>> Yeah. And that's I mean part of what the
way we've constructed this portfolio I
mean Perry was really preient when he
thought about the Great Lakes, the
Midwest. It wasn't just because he was
from Wisconsin or he was traveling to
the Midwest. It's because in the Midwest
we have the best soil, some of the best
water resources. And what I mean by that
is these recharging aquifers, the Great
Lakes aquifers, but also it rains during
the crop season. So the cheapest form of
irrigation is still just rains. You
don't have to turn anything on or do
anything. But there are parts of the
south and the west where it doesn't rain
when you're growing a crop or it's very
sporadic. So you can't really grow a
crop without irrigation. In the Midwest,
it's more supplemental. So from a
riskmanagement standpoint, it starts
with good soil, good water. We like good
infrastructure so you can move your
crops around. Uh you also, and I had
mentioned earlier, we like areas where
it's a highly competitive market for
rent because we're renting ground. We
want to have lots of farmers out there
that are all looking to grow. They're
all looking to add acres and so that
makes a very competitive market from the
rental side. Some of the stuff that you
know investing in the US isn't a risk.
But there are a lot of people and a lot
of managers that invest outside of the
US. Currency risk is a big deal.
Sovereign risk is a big deal. I mean,
there's been many investors that that
have had more than their hand slapped
for buying land in South America,
particularly in Brazil, that they found
out the group they bought it from might
not have been the owner. And uh there's
a lot of things that we think
transparency is key, but we we really
like title insurance. We like uh rule of
law. So, we invest in the US. We invest
in areas that are very friendly to
farmers, you know, and so that's we
don't own any land in California today.
Maybe we will at some point. I think
that's a little bit more difficult from
a regulatory environment and water is
something that we view as longer term.
You know, water is going to be a gating
issue or a gating factor in a lot of
areas and you're seeing not just
regulation but restriction all across
the country. So, we want to be in areas
where water is plentiful. It's one thing
to have a paper water right. It's
another to have water availability and
that's what we focus on.
>> So, so last question, last two questions
before we get to our favorite questions
we ask all our guests. Let's look out
five or 10 years. What are some of the
biggest opportunities in farmland and
and what are some of the potential
dislocations and risks you're you're
considering?
>> Yeah. So, in terms of opportunity, I
mean, we we think there's just so much
capacity out there to continue to invest
in the the current markets where we are
today, but within the US, we think, you
know, the world's going to continue to
need food as water becomes more
expensive in other parts of the US. So
California as an example or Arizona as
an example, a lot of those crops that
people want to have the USA sticker on,
so vegetables, produce, they're going to
be grown more at least seasonally in
areas where they're cheaper to grow and
every Mexico or
>> so a lot of that today a lot of produce
is grown in Mexico and that's uh labor
is the biggest issue. Labor there is
next to nothing. So if people don't care
if if they're blueberries or if they're
watermelon, say USA, then it will all
come from Mexico if people don't care
because it's just from a cost of
production standpoint, it's so much
less. But in California, the cost of
water, so let's say you have a well that
you need to pump a,000 gallons a minute
to grow celery, that might cost a couple
hundred,000 a year. The cost of the well
itself is a million dollars to grow that
same celery. maybe less of it because
you're not growing year round in
Michigan that well costs $50,000 and it
cost $200 a year to operate. So even if
the labor cost was same same the cost of
production is much much less and every
crop in the US almost every crop moves
west to east toward the population
center. So if you're east of the
Mississippi you've cut a huge freight
cost off of the cost of production too.
>> So west straight to the west east coast
and much cheaper than coming up from
Mexico.
>> Yes. And I think over time, you know,
we're going to see more and more of that
high revenue production move there. So,
we view that as an opportunity. A risk
is always do does the cost of labor
outpace technology growth. We've seen
and part of the reason we like row crops
are because there's more technology
being implemented and much less labor. I
>> I'm glad you mentioned that because one
of the things that was fascinating on
both those shows were the GPS driven
tractors. So if you're going to run a
combine, you're going to lay fertilizer
down, you're going to harvest, these
things essentially drive themselves long
before Tesla because doing that
efficiently is a giant moneysaver. Talk
about the technology that's making
farmland more productive.
>> Yeah, I mean technology I would say in
agriculture is moving as fast as
anywhere and and it's really because
there are real tactical issues around
labor's too expensive, the cost of
inputs has gone up. So to talk to our
farmers and and that's a big part of our
underwriting is we want farmers who are
using the latest technology whereas in
the past if someone was planting a crop
they would broadcast equally across the
entire field the fertilizer the seeds
and when you look at actually some of
these farms the soil types and quality
throughout a farm can be highly diverse.
You could have five to 100 different
soil types. So the soil mapping that
they can do with technology to then
>> via satellite, right? A lot of
>> via satellite and they also use probes
to get out there trust but verify you go
out there and do that and then um they
can use variable rate applications of
fertilizer and seed. So in a an acre of
ground of really high quality black dirt
they might plant 35,000
uh seeds per acre but then in the sier
less lower quality soil it's only
20,000. So, and and achieve the same
yield. So, what you're doing is saving
money on the seed, applying fertilizer
so that it's not running off. And
farmers don't want waste either because
that's money that's just rolling away.
>> And this isn't just satellite. It's
satellite. It's drone. It's a lot of
high tech tools that you don't think of.
You think of picks and shovels with
farms, but there's a lot of high-tech
here. Well, and something as easy as if
you said 20 years ago you had irrigation
on a property, these big irrigation
pivots, and you know, there's some
publicly traded companies that
manufacture all these in the US like
Valley and Lindsay. And 20 years ago, if
a farmer had 20 pivots, they'd have to
have five or six different people in the
morning, get in a truck, and go out and
start them up, and then throughout the
day drive by and make sure they're still
running. Now, that farmer can control
everything from his or her iPhone. They
can start it, stop it, monitor. they
have soil moisture probes out or they
have moisture probes out in the soil so
that they know do we need it in some
cases they are using AI or some learning
mechanisms to say well based on is it
going to rain we're not going to turn
itself on so farmers are subscribing to
some of this kind of smart data to go
out there and make them a better
operator and those are the farmers that
when you look at uh who are the people
that are going to grow they're the ones
that are using the latest technology
that'll do that
>> and our final question before our
favorites. What do you think people
don't understand or aren't talking about
when it comes to farmland as an
investment?
>> Yeah, I think most people don't
understand just the sophistication of
the farmers they're dealing with. When
people say, "What's going on in
agriculture?" They paint with a very
broad brush. And you wouldn't say that
if you said, "What's going on in
accounting?" Well, there's some great
accountants and probably some poor ones.
Or what's going on in any industry. You
have to look at who are the people
leading the way and that's who we try to
partner with because we think they will
help us generate the best returns.
Whenever that Bloomberg Indiana farmland
go exists, it's going to be pretty fully
priced. I think it'll be much more
efficient. The inefficiency is still out
there and uh I think that's what we're
able to I won't say take advantage of,
but that's what we've been able to lever
over time is focusing on that
inefficiency. There will be a lot more
money that comes into investing in
farmland. We're seeing crowdsourcing of
farms. We're seeing more public REITs
that are going to be launched and that
will be out there, but I think it's a
long way when you think of there's no
cheap beta. There'll be a lot of
expensive beta out there. There are
still alpha generators. And this is an
asset class that you just have to go
pick a manager. You can't just say asset
allocation helps us and gets us there.
You have to pick a manager.
>> There's no vanguard for for uh passive
indexing for farm.
>> Not. Yeah. There's no wisdom tree for
that. Yeah. No. [laughter]
>> All right. So, let's jump to our
favorite questions we ask all our
guests. Starting with tell us about your
mentors who helped shape your career.
>> Yeah. So, I I'll start with my parents
because they encouraged all of us on the
six of us in our family do something
else. We know this is not
>> not uncommon with farmers, right?
>> Yeah. And they both grew up on uh dairy
farms and we grew up on my dad's family
farm and my parents were both very well
educated. You know, I remember some of
my best memories as a kid were having
dinner watching Jeopardy with them and
and it was we're always shocked. How do
they know all these answers? They
>> ran the table.
>> Exactly. We were not very successful.
But, uh, you know, our parents were
really focused on education and just
doing, you know, something better. You
know, we'll always have the family farm.
My mom still lives there today and it's
great to go back there. But, you know,
they really encouraged all of us go do
something else and gave us the
opportunity. There was no pressure for
any of us to come back to the farm. and
they actually said, I remember my dad
telling me, uh, the year you were born
and the year you graduated high school,
the price of milk was the same. This is
not a long-term strategy. [laughter]
So, uh, and and so, so I'll start with
them, but you know, I had some great
folks I've worked with throughout my
career. Uh, someone at Morgan Stanley
that I think really made a difference
for me was Arthur Lev, who had come from
Front Point. He was the head of chief
legal officer there, and he was probably
the biggest proponent of of me going to
Cirrus. He said, "You have to do this.
Why why would you not?" And uh I've
worked with some great people that,
>> you know, having been at Lehman
Brothers, there's a lot of people that
got vaporized that uh I really respected
and you just think, okay, if you're
going to take a chance on something, you
got to do it. And seeing
>> kind of what's happened over time
throughout my career, a lot has
occurred. You know, it's all shaped you
in a different way. and and our founder
Perry be I mean he I think about this
today in 5 years I'll be 52 and that's
when he started Cirrus when he was 52
>> and it was completely different than
being the fixed income money manager
that he was and you know building a
great team I think is the the best thing
he did and the people that we've been
able to hire over time you know I want
to be their mentor because I know
they'll be better than me and and that
that to me has been the most important
thing
>> really fascinating let's talk about
books what are some of your favorites.
What are you reading currently?
>> Yeah, so a book and I I mentioned water
is just such an important thing. A book
that I I read often is called water, the
epic struggle for power and civilization
and it really talks through it's a
history book, but it talks through the
success of civilizations around their
ability to access clean water and their
ability to treat dirty water and get rid
of it. And it's just a a fascinating
story of of and I kind of the growth
throughout the world, population growth.
But something I'm reading now that or I
just finished and it's because I'm on
the board of my high school. They just
did away with cell phones and it's uh
the anxious generation and it's really a
hate.
>> Yeah. It's an eyeopening book about
social media and when people have their
phones just how it impacts their life.
And so our uh Jesuit high school did
away with cell phones. And I think it's
the greatest thing they could do.
>> There's a lot lot of that going on these
days. More and more uh school districts
are are forcing them the kids to put
schools in phones in lockers.
>> Yeah, they they should do that. I mean,
we have to get them out of our house.
The iPads and stuff within our that's a
a bigger battle to get through, but
yeah, it's something that's just eye
opening.
>> Let's talk about streaming. What are you
listening to or watching on uh Netflix
or Amazon Prime?
>> Well, I have a lot of windshield time,
so I listen to a lot of podcasts. So,
you know, invest like the best obviously
um you know, Meb Faber, Jeremy Schwarz,
Barry R Holtz, I listen to a lot of
business podcast. I also love sports, so
I listen to a lot of Ringer podcasts too
around sports and entertainment. Uh on
the streaming side,
>> you know, I rewatch The Wire every year.
It's just my favorite show ever. And uh
so I do that every year. I'm now
watching Severance, which is an
interesting uh I'm not all the way done
with the three seasons yet. So, uh,
>> it takes a couple of of severe turns
that are like, where did that come from?
>> Yeah, I can imagine.
>> But the whole concept is kind of
fascinating.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Final two questions. What sort of advice
would you give to a recent college grad
interested in a career in either
um, investing alternatives or farmland
investing? Yeah, I think back to, you
know, building the network is probably
the most important thing you can ever do
because there's there's so many people
that are good at whatever you think
you're good at, there's someone that's
better at it for sure. Whether it's
modeling, you know, thinking about
investing, you know, whatever it may be,
someone's always better. So, to me,
building that network and and you can't
be full of it. Like, you have to be
genuine when you when you're talking to
people. But I think that's been the best
thing I've ever done and that's the
thing I can and that's why I take a lot
of time. I mean, we get a lot of people
that reach out to us with all types of
questions. And um all of the portfolio
managers on our team grew up on family
farms. They all went and worked in
finance. And there's probably a lot of
Wall Street people, not per capita, but
generally a lot of Wall Street people
that grew up on farms and had this great
um foundation of hard work and then they
figured we'll just I'll never be able to
use that again for the rest of my life.
So I think being able to build up your
network because sometimes you can pull
on uh a thread and you won't know where
it'll go. And so that's what, you know,
that idea of talking to someone at an
endowment to say, you know, kind of do a
reference check for these people I'm
talking to and they just say, "Well, you
should talk to this other person
instead." And you just never know uh
what path you're going to go down. So
leverage that.
>> Really, really interesting. Our final
question, what do you know about the
world of farmland investing today that
might have been useful 15 years ago or
so when you were first diving into this
space? Yeah, I think uh when I think
about it now, there are very few farms
we missed on that I wouldn't love to own
today. And uh you know, being able to
look back in the rearview mirror and say
that would have been a great purchase.
Um you know, that's always interesting.
>> Is the regrets more the things you did
and shouldn't have or but the thing or
the things you missed and wish you did?
>> No, it's the things we miss that we wish
we had done. But today, we're in a
position that we use no leverage when
buying properties. They're all cash
purchases. You know, you can never say
you're bulletproof, but we have a great
balance sheet. But over time, we were we
were still doing missionary work in
terms of telling people this is a real
asset class. So, we were using leverage
to purchase properties just when we
didn't have new money coming in. So,
we've always been very conservative. And
in farmland, leverage is a different
beast. You know, you can't buy a farm.
It's
>> not 20x.
>> No, you can't buy a farm with 5% down.
You need 50 or 60% down to buy a farm.
>> So, it's modest leverage.
Unless there's a disaster.
>> Yeah. And it's all fixed rate mortgage
debt. But we were just always very
conservative. And I think some of that
conservatism now you'd say, well, maybe
that was overly conservative, but
>> you know, we also didn't get burned. And
you don't move from 30 million to two
billion by being overly aggressive or
you don't do it all at once. Uh you have
to do it over time. And that's kind of
how what we focused on.
>> Brandon, this was absolutely
fascinating. We have been speaking with
Brandon Zik. He is the chief investment
officer of Saras Funds, now owned by the
time you're seeing this, uh, by Wisdom
Tree Asset Management. Um, if you enjoy
this conversation, well, be sure and
check out any of the 569
episodes we've done previously over the
past 11 years. You can find those at
Bloomberg, iTunes, Spotify, and here at
YouTube. Uh, be sure and check out my
new book, How Not to Invest: The Ideas,
Numbers, and Behaviors That Destroy
Wealth and How to Avoid Them: How Not to
Invest at Your Favorite Book Seller. I
would be remiss if I did not thank the
crack staff that puts these
conversations together each week. Alexis
Noriega is my video producer. Anna Luke
is my audio producer. Sean Russo is my
researcher. Sage Bowman is the head of
podcasts here at Bloomberg. I'm Barry
Rholtz. You've been listening to Masters
in Business on Bloomberg Radio.